---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.14.5
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---

(olab:content)=
# Content

+++

## Experiment Layout

+++

Each page of the O-Lab deployment consisted of three main sections: the sidebar, the navbar, and the main-content (see {numref}`olab-layout`). The sidebar, which was hidden by default but could be maximised, was used to present a set of global navigation links between the various experiments and other resource links, such as the laboratory manual. These links could be customised according to each deployment; different teaching groups made use of different manuals, and so the links generated in the sidebar could be configured for each user. The navbar was used for _local_ navigation within the current notebook. For the experiment notebooks, this was used to separate the different stages of an experiment. Within each page, the per-page content was shown in the main-content region, 
which comprised a grid system populated by discrete "cards". Each card contained rich content, e.g. rich-text; interactive widgets; or images; which was used to convey the relevant information about the experimental setup, analysis tasks, and equipment configuration to the user. An example notebook that employs this card system can be seen in {numref}`olab-layout`.

+++

::::{subfigure} AB
:layout-sm: A|B
:align: center
:name: olab-layout
:subcaptions: below

:::{image} image/olab-layout.svg
:alt: (a)
:::

:::{image} image/olab-getting-started.png
:alt: (b)
:::


(a) Schematic rendering of the page layout of a typical O-Lab experiment. Content is divided into several regions; the sidebar, which contains the global navigation links; the navbar, which contains the local navigation links; and the main content, in which the experiment details are presented. Each white rectangle represents a "card", which can contain rich content such as rich text, interactive widgets, or images. (b) Rendering of the "Getting Started" resource presented to new users of O-Lab. This page gives an overview of the purpose of O-Lab, its core features and user-guide, and where to access additional support.
::::

+++

(olab:expt:preliminary)=

## Preliminary Experiments

+++

As a first iteration of the online laboratory concept, a set of six preliminary experiments with close resemblance to their real-world counterparts was designed, listed in {numref}`list-of-experiments`. In addition to reducing the scope of the laboratory design, replicating on-premise experiments also offers the opportunity for students to prepare for practical in-situ experimentation, with an understanding of the real-world constraints. The landing page of each notebook was designed to introduce the experiment, and discuss the various tasks that the user must complete (see {numref}`olab-detector-comparison`. Rendered schematics of the experiment were generated by the the team, and included in the introduction to give a visualisation of what a practical experiment configuration would look like.

+++

:::{list-table} List of preliminary O-Lab experiments
:name: list-of-experiments
:header-rows: 1
:widths: 1 2

* - Notebook
  - Aim
* - `10-nai-detector.ipynb`

  - To investigate and study the properties of the NaI(Tl) detector and understand the mechanisms involved in the detection of gamma rays.
* - `20-hpge-detector.ipynb`
  - To investigate and study the properties of the HPGe detector and understand the mechanisms involved in the detection of gamma rays.
* - `30-gamma-attenuation.ipynb`
  - To measure the absorption cross sections of $\gamma$-rays for a wide range of materials, and to understand the mechanisms involved.
* - `40-neutron-activation.ipynb`
  - To demonstrate the principles of identifying elements in a sample by means of neutron activation analysis.
* - `50-beta-decay.ipynb`
  - To measure simultaneously the half-life of a beta decaying nucleus and the decay energy from the beta spectrum.
* - `60-detector.comparison.ipynb`
  - To compare detector performance of different size NaI(Tl) scintillation detectors.
:::

+++

:::{figure} image/olab-detector-comparison.png
:name: olab-detector-comparison
:width: 512px
:align: center

Screenshot of the `60-detector-comparison.ipynb` notebook, described in {numref}`list-of-experiments`. Each experiment followed a similar structure; the _Introduction_ page was composed from several distinct cards: a list of tasks, a schematic diagram of the apparatus, additional details, safety notes, and any further reading.
:::

+++

From this initial set of experiment proposals, a single candidate was chosen for the proof-of-concept demonstration: _characterisation of a NaI(Tl) scintillation detector_ (`10-nai-detector.ipynb`). In this notebook (see {numref}`olab-nai-detector`), users were charged with building a comprehensive understanding of the observable characteristics of the detector in relation to the observed gamma spectra. In the physical laboratory, this experiment involved the setup of lead shielding (to minimise background radiation, and to reduce exposure to ionising radiation), the selection of a range of gamma sources such as <sup>137</sup>Cs, and the configuration of a NaI(Tl) scintillation detector with the necessary Multi Channel Analyser (MCA), high-voltage amplifier, and computer (for analysis). {numref}`olab-nai-detector` shows the landing page for the experiment. Students were expected to read this page, and identify the key tasks and further reading in order to support self-assisted learning. As discussed in {numref}`olab-detector-comparison`, the layout of this page was standardised with subsequent experiments to provide a familiar workflow. Once students were comfortable with the requirements of the experiment, they were encouraged to move to the next page (section) in order to learn about the details of the experiment that they would be performing.

+++

:::{figure} image/olab-nai-detector.png
:name: olab-nai-detector
:width: 512px
:align: center

Screenshot of the `10-nai-detector.ipynb` notebook introduction page, bearing close resemblance to {numref}`olab-detector-comparison`.
:::

+++

The _Experiment Details_ page (see {numref}`olab-nai-detector-details`) was designed to provide auxiliary information about the experiment setup to the students. Students are expected to gain an understanding of the operating limits of the detectors (e.g. the safe voltage range), and learn how to connect the experimental modules together in order to perform a measurement. Some of these tasks have been replicated within O-Lab, whilst others (particularly the task of working with physical experimental modules) have been left for future work. As discussed in {ref}`olab:hybrid-learning`, it is an educational question as to whether to fully virtualise the physical experiment, or whether to build a distinct learning experience through the form of a virtual experiment. In the early stages of this pilot, it was decided that these experiments would attempt to prepare students for the real-world laboratory experiments. This would minimise the burden on educators to adapt assessment workflows, and account for the considerable uncertainty in the student timetabling as to whether students would return to the physical laboratories in the academic year. In future revisions to these experiments, this information will still be pertinent in order to contextualise the subsequent results that the students obtain.

+++

:::{figure} image/olab-nai-detector-details.png
:name: olab-nai-detector-details
:width: 512px
:align: center

Screenshot of the `10-nai-detector.ipynb` notebook details page, discussing the finer details of how the experimental equipment is operated, and points of consideration during operation.
:::

+++

The _Detector Properties_ page (see {numref}`olab-nai-detector-details`) was designed to strike a balance between establishing O-Lab as a self-contained learning resource, and leaning upon existing literature to develop student understanding. Although virtual platforms are at an advantage in terms of integrating third-party content, such as by providing hyperlinks to additional websites, it was considered important that students were not required to move between multiple resources during an experiment. The cards explore the fundamental principles of efficiency, resolution, and calibration, in order to prepare students for the objectives of the experiment. The importance of mixed visual-text imagery was emphasised during the development of this page, with interactive widgets used to visually convey the principle of solid angle (see the _Geometric Efficiency_ card in {numref}`olab-nai-detector-details`). These kinds of interactivity, as discussed in {ref}`olab:learning-tools`, provide a compact interrogatory mechanism for explaining visual phenomenon. The ability to mix rich-prose (Markdown) with mathematical expressions (LaTeX) and interactive widgets was found to significantly reduce the time to author this content. In particular, diagrams could be written in code and directly embedded into the document in favor of authoring the same content offline (see the _Intrinsic Efficiency_ card in {numref}`olab-nai-detector-details`). This significantly reduced the time to produce these kinds of diagrams, and made the collaborative effort easier; content authors were able to synchronise changes to the document (using Git) and iterate upon the designs.

+++

:::{figure} image/olab-nai-detector-properties.png
:name: olab-nai-detector-properties
:width: 512px
:align: center

Screenshot of the `10-nai-detector.ipynb` notebook properties page, discussing the various properties of a detector, and how they are measured.
:::

+++

The _Detector Investigation_ page (see {numref}`olab-nai-detector-investigation`) provides students with a series of interactive cards. Some of these cards were designed to represent the interface of experimental modules in the laboratory, such as the _ORTEC 671 Amplifier_. The _ORTEC 671 Amplifier_ card depicts a spectroscopic amplifier manufactured by ORTEC; it provides the user with sliders to control the coarse and fine gain of the amplifier. This level of granularity (one card per module) was chosen in order to maintain a logical relationship between the experimental setup diagrams and the practical experiment. Each module embeds a link to the relevant manufacturer documentation, shown with a blue external link icon. This supports students in furthering their understanding of the apparatus, and encourages them to think about these cards as representative of a physical device. This is the first step towards designing a skeumorphic user interface.

In the _Spectrum Viewer_ card, users are presented with a histogram display. This can be panned, zoomed, and supports switching to a logarithmic (Y) scale. A separate _Export_ widget provides the ability to export the rendered histogram to a range of formats, such as ROOT, Spe, CSV, PNG, JPEG, and SVG. The result can be renamed according to the student preference. The exported plots can then be used by students in their subsequent write-up of the experiment.

The _NaI(Tl) Detector_ card represents the sodium iodide scintillation detector that underpins the experiment. The user is presented with a voltage slider, controlling the preamplifier voltage, and shown a status checkmark (_Operational Voltage_) which describes whether the detector is running at a supported voltage. This was designed in order to prepare users for the practical considerations of operating a detector in laboratory conditions, a technique discussed in {ref}`olab:simplicity-and-reproducibility`. 

The _Environment_ card is an entrypoint for the user-configured aspect of the experiment. Each experiment features a customised _Environment_ card that implements the non-standard aspects of the experiment. In {numref}`olab-nai-detector-investigation`, the environment corresponds to the source type and distance to the detector. The user can also choose to hide the background, which would otherwise require a manual background subtraction in the laboratory. 

Finally, the _Acquisition_ card corresponds to the MCA discussed above. Users can perform multiple acquisitions, and configure the characteristic parameters of the corresponding device software such as the lower and upper channels, or the live time of the measurement. Repeated acquisitions are superposed via the _Acquire_ button, whilst the user can clear the buffer using the _Clear_ button.

+++

:::{figure} image/olab-nai-detector-investigation.png
:name: olab-nai-detector-investigation
:width: 512px
:align: center

Screenshot of the `10-nai-detector.ipynb` notebook experiment page, providing interactive widgets to configure the apparatus and produce a spectrum. 
:::

+++

An additional experiment was virtualised in order to assist with educational outreach provision. A simplified variant of the _Gamma Attenuation_ experiment was built, in which the absorption cross sections of gamma-rays is determined for a range of materials (see {numref}`olab-gamma-attenuation`). Using the rich-content mechanism, a spreadsheet widget was created, whose contents were mapped onto a scatter plot to visualise the Beer-Lambert law. A group of Year-9 students was tasked with exploring the relationship between absorber material, thickness, and the number of gamma rays observed. In a practical laboratory, this would have required careful instruction about how to use the apparatus, such as learning how to use the proprietary acquisition software, and handling of shielding materials. These present both a safety and supervision burden on staff, limiting the kinds of experiments that can be performed by visiting students. With O-Lab, it was possible to design an experiment that did not require such knowledge — exemplifying the flexibility of virtual laboratories that was explored in {ref}`olab:hybrid-learning`. In this notebook, some of the interactive elements were simplified to minimise the risk of confusion. The _Acquisition_ card was modified to prevent superposition of measurements; students were not required to clear the buffer before each new measurement. The addition of a _Peak Area_ card avoided the need for off-line analysis tools e.g. ROOT, and allowed students to continue to work in-browser. Finally, the plotting cards (consisting of a spreadsheet and scatter graph) were added to reduce the time-to-results for the students. These modifications ensured that remote demonstrators could effectively cover the experiment material in the required time frame.

+++

:::{figure} image/olab-gamma-attenuation.png
:name: olab-gamma-attenuation
:width: 512px
:align: center

Screenshot of the `70-gamma-attenuation.ipynb` notebook experiment page, providing interactive widgets to explore the attenuation of gamma rays through a range of absorber materials and thicknesses.
:::

```{code-cell}

```
