---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.14.5
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3 (ipykernel)
  language: python
  name: python3
---

# Conclusions
A workflow for feature analysis of the raw GET waveforms was established, using modern columnar analysis tools and techniques to ensure high throughput and convenient re-analysis. Alongside this analysis, a suite of investigative tools was developed to aid the investigation of single events at different stages of the analysis workflow, such as 3D event viewers, 2D hit-map reconstruction, and 1D waveform analysis. An understanding of the limitations associated with the TexAT detector was developed, with particular focus upon the problem of "ringing" in the high-gain MicroMeGaS regions, and the challenge associated with strip-chain agreement for near-planar events. As such, strategies for identifying the GET waveforms with ringing artefacts, and extracting a usable signal were developed. Though amenable to recovery using symmetries of the detector, poor performance of the silicon detector array was observed to diminish the statistics of subsequent analysis work. In the absence of information concerning the detector configuration, such as the displacement of the silicon detector wall with respect to the center of the detector, hitmaps of reconstructed tracks against the silicon quadrants were made to infer an adjustment factor.

Simulations of the properties of the {math}`{}^{4}\mathrm{He} + \mathrm{CO}_2` gas mixture were made to support simulation and analysis of novel reconstruction approaches in the {math}`{}^{4}\mathrm{He} + {}^{10}\mathrm{C}` scattering reaction. The drift velocity, drift resolution, and stopping powers of relevant ions were computed for the gas mixture; wrapper codes for both SRIM and MSTAR were improved / developed, and these codes investigated for the heavy ion ({math}`{}^{10}\mathrm{C}`) energy loss calculations. Investigations into the use of Hough transform, RANSAC, and graph-cut methods for track finding and fitting were performed, with a comparison made between state of the art sequential RANSAC and the novel PEARL method for a set of exemplar events. To generate these events, the reaction and electronic simulation packages (TexATSim and TexATResponse) were heavily modified to improve the user experience, and correctness of the cluster diffusion resolution model. These tools were then used to generate test cases against which the PEaRL-based method for track fitting was developed. A line-interval model for finite-length tracks was derived, and used alongside the PEARL method to reconstruct particle tracks recorded by the TexAT TPC detector at the Texas A & M Cyclotron Institute, College Station, United States. 

An exploration of the literature was conducted to determine the structures that might be populated in the elastic alpha-scattering entrance channel of the {math}`{}^{14}\mathrm{O}` nucleus. An initial, highly preliminary exploration of the experimental results was made towards investigating the states populated in {math}`{}^{14}\mathrm{O}` via the elastic scattering channel. A preliminary excitation function was derived for the different reconstruction methods, whose shortcomings were discussed. The inability to discriminate between the elastic and inelastic contributions to the zero-degree excitation function was identified as a fundamental limitation to further analysis of these data. In support of future analysis of these data, the theory behind constrained optimisation of track fitting was explored. Future work should investigate the use of R-Matrix fitting codes such as AZURE2 in the fitting of angular cross-section functions in order to assign spin-parities to measured states. Alongside work to compute the final reaction kinematics, an exploration of the beam energy reconstructed through a full kinematic analysis was made in comparison to that derived from the stopping power beam in the TPC fill gas. A focus was placed upon the auxiliary data required to reconstruct TPC reactions, with reference to the need for measured stopping powers of the light particle within the active medium. In the absence of these data, the aforementioned simulated values were used.

In the second half of this thesis, a virtual online laboratory for nuclear physics students was developed, with a strong focus on reducing the time-to-deployment, familiarity to existing laboratory users, and integration with existing Learning Tools Interoperability (LTI)-aware Virtual Learning Environments (VLE)s. A series of virtual laboratory experiments were designed around existing in-person experiences, with requisite support material to facilitate self-sufficient learning. A cloud-based JupyterHub deployment was developed using Kubernetes to provide distance-learning and self-isolating students with access to per-user compute environments outside of the University campus network. Provision was made for future extensions of the laboratory including cloud-based analysis to facilitate future extensions into hybrid-learning. The high-level usage data for an initial cohort of students were recorded and analysed to infer usage patterns, and task engagement.
